Decouple CA and end-entity certificate management (#116)
strimzi/proposals: 073-decouple-ca-management-from-end-entity-certificate-management.md

* strimzi.io/cluster-ca-key-generation tracks the CA key generation to determine whether new end entity certificates are required
* strimzi.io/cluster-ca-cert-generation tracks the CA certificate generation to determine whether components trust the CA

## Motivation

Removing the assumption that there is a single root CA certificate stored in a special Secret that is directly used for trust would enable much more flexibility in CA handling.
This will be compatible with commonly deployed certificate management solutions such as [Cert Manager][cmio], or [Vault][vault].
These solutions generate certificates signed by arbitrary CAs, requiring the support for more than one root CA certificate.
In addition these solutions cannot be responsible for rolling updates to components like Kafka, so this should be decoupled from the CA generation.
This would be highly valuable for organizations with compliance requirements with regard to certificates. 

## Proposal

Strimzi should be updated to decouple the management of the cluster and clients CAs, and the consumption of those CAs by components (such as ZooKeeper, Kafka and cluster operator).

> To do this we will introduce new secrets to share the CA certificates and track their lifecycle

Author: I've updated to say "to keep track of CA certificates and their current state". I've also added some more sentences to make it clearer what components will interact with the secret

> These secrets are different from the ones that are mounted into the components to use a truststore.

Author: Hopefully this is clearer now

> This allows the cluster operator and user operator to manage the truststore secrets independently of how the CAs are being managed and make it easier to reason about which CA certificates are in use.

Author: I haven't specifically added an example, but hopefully this is clearer now with the extra explanation given

These secrets can be updated by multiple processes.

> ### Secret format

Author: I've updated to "New Kubernetes Secret format for CA certificate state"

```yaml
kind: Secret
metdata:

>   name: ${cluster}-${ca-type}-trust # e.g. foo-cluster-ca-trust

Author: I agree that 'trust' is not a clear name, I think the tricky thing is distinguishing it from the secrets that are mounted into the components. Would `foo-cluster-ca-status` work?

>   name: ${cluster}-${ca-type}-trust # e.g. foo-cluster-ca-trust

Reviewer: could you also specify possible values for `ca-type` (I would assume "cluster" and "clients"? but it's better to be clear here)

type: strimzi.io/trust
data:
  ${fingerprint}.${state}: <PEM encoded Secret>
```

> 

Author: I've added a sentence to make this clearer

> The `fingerprint` is the fingerprint/thumbprint of the certificate. I.e. the SHA-1 hash of the ASN.1 DER-encoded form of the X509 certificate. The `state` can be any of the states of the CA certificate trust state machine described below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `fingerprint` is the fingerprint/thumbprint of the certificate. I.e. the SHA-1 hash of the ASN.1 DER-encoded form of the X509 certificate, which is a commonly used way of identifying certificates using common tooling.
The `state` can be any of the states of the CA certificate trust state machine described below.
```

> Including the state in the item name facilitates inspection of the Secret.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Including the state in the item name facilitates understanding the current role of the Secret within the cluster.
```

The existing Secrets, named using `${cluster}-${ca}-certs` and passed via Secret volume mounts to containers would not change under this proposal.

> Problems from multiple processes concurrently updating the secret are avoided by using `metadata.resourceVersion` to make conditional requests when updating that Secret. Note also that only one operator makes each state transition.

Reviewer 2: If you have described what is responsible for producing/updating these certificates then this sentence will make a bit more sense. Right now it's not clear what the multiple processes are.

### CA state machine

The "CA certificate trust state machine" has the following states:

```
  UNTRUSTED // not yet trusted everywhere it needs to be 
   |
   v

>   TRUSTED_UNUSED // trusted everywhere it needs to be, but no EE certificates yet issued

Reviewer 2: You should explain why this state is needed.

   |
   v

>   TRUSTED_USED // trusted everywhere, EE certificates issued

Reviewer 2: `USED` is a bit confusing. I think we really mean `IN_USE`, which means there are end-entity certificates with this CA certificate are issuer, and that this CA certificate may be used as the issuer of new end-entity certificates.

   |
   v

>   PHASE_OUT // trusted everywhere, but being phased out

Author: My expectation is we move to this phase when we are expecting to imminently going to be issuing new end-entity certificates. So I think phase out makes sense, but we could switch to "DEPRECATED" or "OUTDATED" maybe?

   |
   v

>   ZOMBIE // still trusted by some component, but not relied on by any party.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  ZOMBIE // still trusted by some component, but with no issued end-entity certificates in current use.
```

```

New cluster creation process:
1. The CaReconciler creates the CA certificates and places them in the relevant Secret with the state UNTRUSTED
2. The cluster and user operator, during their respective reconcile loops:
   1. Add the CA certificate to the relevant component truststore secret and change the state to TRUSTED_UNUSED

>    2. Generate end entity certificates using the CA and add the EE certificate to the relevant component keystore secret and change the state to TRUSTED_USED

Reviewer 2: It's this part which is central to using Cert Manager etc. With those things the only action available is to ask for an EE certificate. It arrives with whatever arbitrary CA certificate was used. But in a clustered technology like Kafka that EE cert can't be used if the CA cert isn't trusted. 

So if the goal of this Proposal is just to introduce the new Secret (which I think it is, right), then:

1. Let's add a list of goals and of non-goals in the `Motivation` section. Goals: Replace the Secret used for sharing the (CA) certificates that should be trusted by components. Non-goals: Changing the certificate issuance process to be agnostic about the origin of CA-certificates.
2. Then mention here that this is essentially the same process as today, in that creating CA certificates is something that the CO directly concerns itself with (but that it is a longer term goal to make the CO less opinionated about this)

Author: I haven't added this explicitly, but I think the new text explains it clearer, so hopefully we don't need this now?

> Update process (e.g. CA key has been updated):

Reviewer 2: key is a very overloaded term. Can you qualify this as either public key, private key, or `key` within a `Secret`. (not secret key, which is another thing!)

1. The CaReconciler generates a new CA certificate and places it in the relevant Secret with the state UNTRUSTED. It also updates the old CA certificate to have the state PHASE_OUT.
2. The cluster and user operator, during their respective reconcile loop:
   1. Add the CA certificate to the relevant component truststore secret and change the state to TRUSTED_UNUSED
   2. Generate end entity certificates using the CA and add the EE certificate to the relevant component keystore secret and change the state to TRUSTED_USED
   3. Update the old CA certificate to ZOMBIE, indicating that no EE certicates are using the CA certificate

> 3. In a future loop the CaReconciler removes the CA certificate from the shared Secret

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. In a future loop the CaReconciler removes the CA certificate from the shared Secret (because it is observed to be in the `ZOMBIE` state).
```

4. The cluster and user operator remove the CA certificate from the truststore Secret

Notes:

> 1. The key for the self-signed cluster CA in a Kafka cluster called **foo**, can be stored in `foo-cluster-ca`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. The private key for the self-signed cluster CA in a Kafka cluster called **foo**, can be stored in `foo-cluster-ca`.
```

2. The strimzi.io/cluster-ca-key-generation can be used by the cluster operator when managing the self-signed cluster CA

> 3. The strimzi.io/cluster-ca-cert-generation on components can be used to store the fingerprint of the issuing CA, rather than an increasing integer

Reviewer 2: Why would do reuse this annotation? It has generation in the name, so it would be surprising if it didn't contain an integer. If we need to store the fingerprint why not use `strimzi.io/cluster-ca-cert-fingerprint`?

### Future changes

> Once this proposal is implemented, it allows in future to update to change both the issuing of end entity certificates and the management of the CAs to be done by certificate management solutions, similarly to the [closed proposal][pr46].

Reviewer 2: I do think it's worth adding a sentence or two about the overall direction/plan. What we want to achieve, and what this Proposal takes a step towards, is having each `Secret` have a clear, well-defined role. Other steps required are:

1. Changing the EE cert issuance process such that EE certificates are issued, their issuer inspected and if not already trusted then the new EE certificates are held in a "staging Secret" while trust in the CA certificate is rolled out. We can do this refactoring without adding support for Cert Manager.
2. Having each broker have its own Secret for its EE certificate and key. This isn't strictly required for Cert Manager support, but it does enable larger clusters.
3. Add support for Cert Manager.

Author: I've added some more information, hopefully i's clearer now

## Motivation

Removing the assumption that there is a _single_ root CA certificate stored in a special Kubernetes Secret that is directly used for trust would enable much more flexibility in CA handling.
This will be compatible with commonly deployed certificate management solutions such as [Cert Manager][cmio], or [Vault][vault].
These solutions generate certificates that (from the PoV of an end-entity certificate requester) are signed by arbitrary CAs.
Using those solutions therefore requires TLS peers to be able to trust multiple root CA certificates.
In addition these solutions cannot be responsible for rolling updates to components like Kafka.
This means that end-entity certificate generation and the rollout of trust in the CA certificates referenced in those end-entity certificates, needs to be decoupled.
This would be highly valuable for organizations with compliance requirements with regard to certificates.

## Proposal

Strimzi should be updated to decouple the management of the cluster and clients CA certificates, and the consumption of those CA certificates by components (such as ZooKeeper, Kafka and cluster operator).

> To do this we will introduce new Kubernetes Secrets that are used to keep track of CA certificates and their current state.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To do this we will introduce new Kubernetes Secrets that are used to keep track of CA certificates and their current state with respect to issued end entity certificates .
```

The cluster operator and user operator will copy the CA certificates from the new Kubernetes Secrets into the existing truststore Kubernetes Secrets that are mounted into components.
The cluster operator and user operator will update the new Kubernetes Secrets to reflect whether the CA certificates are currently trusted and/or in use or not.
This will make it easier to reason about which CA certificates are in use/trusted, and allow the management of CA certificates to be evolved further in future (see [Future changes](#future-changes)).
These new Kubernetes Secrets can be updated by multiple processes (i.e the cluster operator when issuing the CA certificates, and the cluster and user operators when updating the state of CA certificates).

### New Kubernetes Secret format for CA certificate state

A new Kubernetes Secret is introduced which is primarily updated by the cluster operator in its role as a CA, but also updated by the cluster operator and user operator to reflect whether the individual CA certificates are trusted and/or in use in the cluster.

```yaml
kind: Secret
metdata:
  name: ${cluster}-${ca-type}-trust # e.g. foo-cluster-ca-trust

> type: strimzi.io/trust

Reviewer 2: I think this would be the first time we've used/defined a Secret `type`. I think it would be good to define a json schema for any such types we define.

   |
   v
  TRUSTED_IN_USE // trusted everywhere, EE certificates issued using this CA certificate
   |
   v
  PHASE_OUT // trusted everywhere, but new end-entity certificates will not be issued using this CA certificate
   |
   v
  ZOMBIE // still trusted by some component, but with no issued end-entity certificates in current use.
```

New cluster creation process:
1. The CaReconciler creates the CA certificates and places them in the relevant Kubernetes Secret with the state UNTRUSTED
2. The cluster and user operator, during their respective reconcile loops:
   1. Add the CA certificate to the relevant component truststore Kubernetes Secret and change the state to TRUSTED_UNUSED
   2. Generate end entity certificates using the CA and add the EE certificate to the relevant component keystore Kubernetes Secret and change the state to TRUSTED_IN_USE

Update process (e.g. CA private key has been updated):
1. The CaReconciler generates a new CA certificate and places it in the relevant Kubernetes Secret with the state UNTRUSTED. It also updates the old CA certificate to have the state PHASE_OUT.
2. The cluster and user operator, during their respective reconcile loop:

>    1. Add the CA certificate to the relevant component truststore Kubernetes Secret and change the state to TRUSTED_UNUSED

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   1. Add the new CA certificate to the relevant component truststore Kubernetes Secret and change the state to TRUSTED_UNUSED
```

>    2. Generate end entity certificates using the CA and add the EE certificate to the relevant component keystore Kubernetes Secret and change the state to TRUSTED_IN_USE

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   2. Generate end entity certificates using the new CA and add the EE certificate to the relevant component keystore Kubernetes Secret and change the state to TRUSTED_IN_USE
```

I'm also confused by the use of `end-entity` and `EE`, are they same thing?

   3. Update the old CA certificate to ZOMBIE, indicating that no EE certicates are using the CA certificate

> 3. In a future loop the CaReconciler removes the CA certificate from the shared Kubernetes Secret (because it is observed to be in the `ZOMBIE` state).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. In a future loop the CaReconciler removes the old CA certificate from the shared Kubernetes Secret (because it is observed to be in the `ZOMBIE` state).
```

> 4. The cluster and user operator remove the CA certificate from the truststore Kubernetes Secret

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
4. The cluster and user operator remove the old CA certificate from the truststore Kubernetes Secret
```

### Future changes

Once this proposal is implemented, it allows in future to update to change both the issuing of end entity certificates and the management of the CA certificates to be done by certificate management solutions, similarly to the [closed proposal][pr46].
This proposal is the first step because it decouples the management of the CA certificates, from the rolling out of trust of those CA certificates.
The next logical step will be to change the end-entity certificate issuance process, so that an end-entity certificate and it's root CA certificate can be received at the same time.
Currently it is assumed that the CA certificate is already issued and is used for signing the end-entity certificates, rather than an end-entity certificate has been received that has been signed by (from the PoV of the requesting operator) and arbitrary CA.

## Affected/not affected projects

This affects the strimzi-kafka-operator project only.

## Compatibility

> Call out any future or backwards compatibility considerations this proposal has accounted for.

Reviewer 4: I think this should explain what happens during the upgrade when using the Strimzi and when using the Custom CAs.

Author: @scholzj do you mean what would happen during a regular upgrade, or specifically when upgrading from Strimzi using the old mechanism, to this new mechanism?

<!-- This template is provided as an example with sections you may wish to comment on with respect to your proposal. Add or remove sections as required to best articulate the proposal. -->

# Decouple CA certificate management from end-entity certificate management

This proposal aims to decouple the management of the cluster and client CA certificates from the rolling out of trust of those certificates to components in a Strimzi cluster.

## Current situation

When deploying Kafka clusters, in order to provide a secure-by-default, TLS out-of-the-box experience Strimzi ended up implementing its own CA operations internally, within the cluster operator.

> It does this by using `openssl` to generate a self-signed root CA certificate and private key which is then used to directly sign end-entity (EE) certificates (i.e. intermediate certificates are not used).

Reviewer 4: Its not just Kafka and ZooKeeper. It is also KE, CC, TO, and UO. So it would be quite long I guess.

> It does this by using `openssl` to generate a self-signed root CA certificate and private key which is then used to directly sign end-entity (EE) certificates (i.e. intermediate certificates are not used).

Reviewer: I was referring to a place where it was mentioned "ZK EE certificate" while "ZK certificate" is enough ... but looking better it's just one/two places so please ignore this comment.

In fact Strimzi has two such CAs.
The "cluster CA" is used for issuing certificates for Strimzi components:
* ZooKeeper nodes
* Kafka nodes
* User and Topic operators
* Cruise Control
* Kafka Exporter

The "clients CA" is used for issuing certificates for user applications using the User Operator, or through another external mechanism chosen by the user.

The cluster CA root certificate is added to Strimzi component trust stores (so that, for example, ZooKeeper nodes trust each other's and brokers' certificates, and brokers trust certs issued to other brokers, etc).

> ![Cluster CA relationships](./images/073-cluster-ca.svg)

Reviewer 5: Maybe a title could make it clearer what we're seeing?

> In the diagram, the red lines show trust.
> For example, because the Kafka Broker trusts the Cluster CA certificate,
> and the Cluster CA certificate signed the ZK EE certificate
> the broker will trust the ZK EE certificate presented by the ZK node
> during TLS handshake.

The cluster CA root certificate also needs to be trusted by Kafka clients connecting to the cluster so that clients trust the certificates presented by the brokers.
The client CA root certificate is added to the broker trust stores too, so that the brokers will trust certificates issued to Kafka client applications.

> ![Client CA relationships](./images/073-clients-ca.svg)

Reviewer 5: Maybe a title could make it clearer what we're seeing?

### Existing Kubernetes Secrets

Strimzi currently uses the following Kubernetes Secrets to store the CA certificates and private keys:
* <CLUSTER_NAME>-cluster-ca-cert for the Cluster CA root certificate
* <CLUSTER_NAME>-cluster-ca for the Cluster CA private key
* <CLUSTER_NAME>-clients-ca-cert for the Clients CA root certificate
* <CLUSTER_NAME>-clients-ca for the Clients CA private key

Strimzi currently uses the following Kubernetes Secrets to store end-entity certificates (signed by the cluster CA) that components will present to clients:
* <CLUSTER_NAME>-kafka-brokers for Kafka brokers
* <CLUSTER_NAME>-zookeeper-nodes for ZooKeeper nodes

> Strimzi currently uses the following Kubernetes Secrets to store client certificates (signed by the cluster CA) that components will present to Kafka or ZooKeeper when making requests:

Author: I was hoping that the part stating `that components will present to Kafka or ZooKeeper when making requests` would make it clear.

> Strimzi currently uses the following Kubernetes Secrets to store client certificates (signed by the cluster CA) that components will present to Kafka or ZooKeeper when making requests:

Author: The specific components are listed underneath, since they each have their own Kubernetes Secret

* strimzi.io/cluster-ca-cert-generation for certificates signed by the Cluster CA
* strimzi.io/clients-ca-cert-generation for certificates signed by the Clients CA

Strimzi uses the following annotation on Kubernetes Pods to indicate the generation of the Cluster CA private key used to sign the cluster CA certificate that the pod currently trusts
* strimzi.io/cluster-ca-key-generation

### Existing reconcile flow

The reconcile loop for certificates is split over a couple of classes that run one after another, those are:
1. CaReconciler
2. ZooKeeperReconciler
3. KafkaReconciler
4. EntityOperatorReconciler
5. CruiseControlReconciler
6. KafkaExporterReconciler

Currently, as part of a reconciliation loop, the CaReconciler handles three things:
1. Verifying the Cluster CA and Client CA Kubernetes Secrets. For each CA:
   1. If Strimzi is managing the CA it either creates or renews the CA certificate and key and stores them in the Kubernetes Secrets listed above

>    2. If Strimzi is **not** managing the CA it checks that the Kubernetes Secrets for the CA certificate and private key are present in the cluster

Reviewer 6: I mean, if Strimzi is not managing the CA, then it's the user (custom certificates).

>    2. If Strimzi is **not** managing the CA it checks that the Kubernetes Secrets for the CA certificate and private key are present in the cluster

Reviewer: But if Strimzi is not managing the CA cert then `it checks that the Kubernetes Secrets for the CA certificate and private key are present in the cluster` ... this is something that the operator does, not the user.
I mean, the user set in the Kafka CR that CAs will be handled by him/her. Then user forgets to create the Secrets. The operator will detect that. This is what point 2 is saying, right @katheris ?

>    2. If Strimzi is **not** managing the CA it checks that the Kubernetes Secrets for the CA certificate and private key are present in the cluster

Reviewer 6: This is just a nit, but I would phrase this like: "If the user is managing the CA, Strimzi checks that the Kubernetes Secrets for the CA certificate and private key are present in the cluster"

2. Reconciles the <CLUSTER_NAME>-cluster-operator-certs Kubernetes Secret used by the cluster operator's Admin client when connecting to Kafka and ZooKeeper
   1. This only occurs if all pods in the cluster have the correct strimzi.io/cluster-ca-key-generation annotation, meaning the Cluster CA certificate that is being put into the Kubernetes Secret is already trusted by all components
3. Maybe triggering a rolling update of the ZooKeeper and Kafka nodes to trust a new Cluster CA certificate. This only happens if either:
   1. The Cluster CA key got replaced during the current reconciliation, or
   2. Some pods do not trust the latest Cluster CA certificate, which implies the operator previously updated the Cluster CA key and a rolling update was started during a previous reconciliation, but it was not completed

ZooKeeperReconciler and KafkaReconciler classes:

> 1. Generate the certificates they will present to clients and store them in the Kubernetes Secrets listed above, with the cluster-ca-cert-generation (and clients-ca-cert-generation for Kafka) annotation set to the current value passed in with the Cluster CA (and Clients CA).

Reviewer: re-reading again your subjects are ZooKeeperReconciler and KafkaReconciler here ... but then you say "they will present" ... it's not correct, because it's not the reconcilers presenting the certs but the ZooKeeper and Kafka nodes, so I would make it clearer first.
Regarding the "clients" issues maybe just adding ".... to clients (other ZooKeeper or Kafka nodes, or Kafka consumer or producer)"? Or maybe I am just overthinking :-D

4. The ZooKeeper and Kafka reconcilers generate new certificates signed by the new CA key and roll the pods to use the new certificates
5. The EntityOperator, CruiseControl and KafkaExporter reconcilers generate new certificates signed by the new CA key amd roll the pods to use the new certificates
6. A new reconciliation starts
7. The CaReconciler updates the <CLUSTER_NAME>-cluster-operator-certs Kubernetes Secret with the new CA certificate (since the generations are now correct)
8. The CaReconciler removes the old CA certificates and keys that have been named ca-YYYY-MM-DDTHH-MM-SSZ.crt.

The existing logic assumes two things:
 - all certificates used by components have been signed by the same root CA certificate
 - the CaReconciler runs and (if required) has either created or updated the CA certificates and keys before the other reconcilers run, i.e. the CA certificate is already present when e.g. the KafkaReconciler starts

## Motivation

In future it would be beneficial if Strimzi can integrate with commonly deployed certificate management solutions, such as [Cert Manager][cmio], or [Vault][vault].

> These solutions work by having the user request certificates from a particular issuer.

Reviewer 4: Maybe we can use something better than _user_? As that suggests it has to be done manually which is not what we  in general want / expect. Can we make it more neutral as to who requests it? User, other system, etc.

Integrating with these solutions requires a change in how things are managed. Specifically:
 - Strimzi cannot guarantee that the issuer will issue every certificate signed by the same root CA certificate. 
   - For example Cert Manager will include the CA certificate to trust when it issues the certificate (if the CA certificate is not a public one)

>    - Using those solutions therefore requires TLS peers to be able to trust multiple root CA certificates.

Reviewer 4: I still think this is heavily overstated. The Cert Manager-based workflow will make you trust a single CA. That might require handling of multiple trusted certs during renewals or moves, but I do not think it justifies the whole apparatus built below.

 - These solutions cannot be responsible for rolling updates to components like Kafka.
   - This means that end-entity certificate generation and the rollout of trust in the CA certificates referenced in those end-entity certificates, needs to be decoupled.
 - Certificates will likely be requested in an asynchronous manner, which means it can't be assumed that e.g. the CA certificate is already present when the component reconcilers run.
This would be highly valuable for organizations with compliance requirements with regard to certificates.

In addition, currently it is hard to see the current state of trust within the cluster when certificates are being renewed.
The proposed changes make it easier to reason about the current state and track the roll out of trust.

## Proposal

Strimzi should be updated to decouple the management of the cluster and clients CA certificates, and the consumption of those CA certificates by components (such as ZooKeeper, Kafka and cluster operator).

> To do this we will introduce new shared Kubernetes Secrets that are used to keep track of CA certificates that are currently in use and their current state with respect to issued end entity certificates.

Reviewer: I would give a name to this "new shared Kubernetes Secrets" to make it easier to refer to it across the proposal.

These new Kubernetes Secrets are separate from the ones that are used by Strimzi to store the latest CA certificate and key (or by the user when they are managing their own certificate).
The cluster operator will update these new Kubernetes Secrets when it renews cluster or client CA certificates (or observes that the user has updated them).
The cluster operator and user operator will copy the CA certificates from the existing Kubernetes Secrets into the new shared Kubernetes Secrets.
The new shared Kubernetes Secrets will be mounted into components to use as a truststore.

> The cluster operator and user operator will update the new shared Kubernetes Secrets to reflect whether the CA certificates are currently trusted and/or in use or not.

Reviewer: Wouldn't it make sense to have a diagram helping to follow the above sequence and relationships between current and new Secrets?

This will make it easier to reason about which CA certificates are in use/trusted, and allow the management of CA certificates to be evolved further in future (see [Future changes](#future-changes)).
These new Kubernetes Secrets can be updated by multiple processes (i.e the cluster operator when issuing the CA certificates, and the cluster and user operators when updating the state of CA certificates).

### New Kubernetes Secret format for CA certificate state

> A new Kubernetes Secret is introduced which is primarily updated by the cluster operator in its role as a CA, but also updated by the cluster operator and user operator to reflect whether the individual CA certificates are trusted and/or in use in the cluster.

Reviewer 4: The role of User Operator here is not clear. It does not have any special role with regards to trusting something compared to for example Kafka Exporter. So why is it mentioned here?

```yaml
kind: Secret
metdata:
  name: ${cluster}-${ca-type}-trust # e.g. foo-cluster-ca-trust
type: strimzi.io/trust
data:
  ${fingerprint}.${state}: <PEM encoded CA certificate>
```

The `fingerprint` is the fingerprint/thumbprint of the certificate. I.e. the SHA-1 hash of the ASN.1 DER-encoded form of the X509 certificate, which is a commonly used way of identifying certificates using common tooling.
The `state` can be any of the states of the CA certificate trust state machine described below.
Including the state in the item name facilitates understanding the current role of the Kubernetes Secret within the cluster.

> Problems from multiple processes concurrently updating the Kubernetes Secret are avoided by using `metadata.resourceVersion` to make conditional requests when updating that Secret. Note also that only one operator makes each state transition.

Reviewer 4: How do you avoid such problems? By _loops_ of unsuccessful updates? By reporting the failure?

> ### CA certificate state machine

Reviewer 5: Maybe we could have a diagram showing the proposed flow (as with the diagrams showing the current flows)

Reviewer 3: I agree with this

Author: I've added some diagrams

   |
   v
  PHASE_OUT // trusted everywhere, but new end-entity certificates will not be issued using this CA certificate
   |
   v
  ZOMBIE // still trusted by some component, but with no issued end-entity certificates in current use.
```

When a new cluster is first created the flow is:

1. Either user or CaReconciler creates the Cluster and Client CA certificates and keys and stores them in Kubernetes Secrets.
2. The CaReconciler takes the Cluster CA certificate and places it in the new shared Kubernetes Secret with the state UNTRUSTED
3. At the beginning of the reconcile loop of components, the cluster operator generates the Cluster Operator certificate and stores it in the <CLUSTER_NAME>-cluster-operator-certs Kubernetes Secret
   It does this even though the state is UNTRUSTED, because the Kubernetes Secret was missing
4. The component reconcilers (KafkaReconciler, ZooKeeperReconciler, EntityOperatorReconciler etc):
   1. generate their certificates, store them in Kubernetes Secrets
   2. create their pods annotated with the certificates Kubernetes Secret and new shared Kubernetes Secret mounted onto the pod

> 5. At the end of the reconcile loop of components, the cluster operator updates the shared Kubernetes Secret to change the state of the CA certificate to TRUSTED_IN_USE

Reviewer: the "new" shared Kubernetes Secret? This is why I still think we need a good short name for it.

> When the CA private key is updated (either because it has expired or the user has incremented the generation to indicate they've manually updated the Kubernetes Secret):

Reviewer 4: Your motivation suggests that every server certificate can have a dedicated CA. So you should have also workflows focusing on that and not just repeat the current workflow? I think there are many details required to understand that:
* How do you find out there is a new CA to trust? What it if it not a new private key and just a new public key?
* How do you know the old CA should be phased out? How do you figure out it is not used anymore?

1. If Strimzi is managing the CA, the CaReconciler renews the Cluster and Client CAs certificates and keys. The old certificate and key can be removed from the Kubernetes Secret.
2. The CaReconciler takes the Cluster CA certificate and places it in the new shared Kubernetes Secret with the state UNTRUSTED. It also updates the old CA certificate to have the state PHASE_OUT.
3. The component reconcilers (KafkaReconciler, ZooKeeperReconciler, EntityOperatorReconciler etc) see the new UNTRUSTED CA certificate and:
   1. Roll the pods to trust the new CA certificate

> 4. At the end of the reconcile loop the cluster operator updates the shared Kubernetes Secret to change the state of the CA certificate to TRUSTED_UNUSED

Reviewer 4: Again, you might want to track it in some secret. But as long as we need to roll the pods, you need to track it in the pods in the first place.

5. This change triggers a new reconcile loop
6. At the beginning of the reconcile loop the cluster operator sees there is a CA certificate in the state TRUSTED_UNUSED and regenerates the Cluster Operator certificate, signed by the new CA key and stores it in the <CLUSTER_NAME>-cluster-operator-certs Kubernetes Secret

> 7. The component reconcilers (KafkaReconciler, ZooKeeperReconciler, EntityOperatorReconciler etc) see the new TRUSTED_UNUSED CA certificate and:

Reviewer 4: How does a component `see the new TRUSTED_UNUSED CA certificate and get the new server cert`? The motivation suggests that arbitrary trusted certs come with the private key without prior knowledge of the operator. So you need to first get the _future_ server certificate to figure out you need to trust its CA and only then once the other components trust it (that is n on-trivial for example also because of the TO->CC communication) you can start using it. So I think there is a huge impact on the flow but also on the used Secrets etc. (that said, as my comments on the motivation suggest, I do not think it should really work that way => but it does not seem to fit together.)

   1. Generate new certificates signed by the new CA key
   2. Roll the pods to use the new certificates
8. At the end of the reconcile loop the cluster operator updates the shared Kubernetes Secret to change the state of the CA certificate to TRUSTED_IN_USE and the old CA certificate to ZOMBIE, indicating that no end entity certificates are using the CA certificate
9. In a future loop the CaReconciler removes the old CA certificate from the shared Kubernetes Secret (because it is observed to be in the `ZOMBIE` state).

Notes:

> The existing annotations strimzi.io/ca-cert-generation and strimzi.io/ca-key-generation can still be used by the CaReconciler and the cluster operator to track which certificates the Kubernetes Pods are trusting/using.

Reviewer 4: This got me completely lost as it is now not clear how to the generations relate to your state secret.

This proposal describes a smaller change that could be implemented first.
This first step brings the advantages of better separation of interests in terms of the Kubernetes Secrets used and making it easier to reason about the state of the system, making debugging easier.
By describing only this smaller change the aim is to make it easier to reach consensus and more likely that this change can be added to Strimzi in a timely manner.

### Using separate Kubernetes Secrets for each component

We could have a separate trust secret for each component (Kafka, ZooKeeper, EntityOperator, CruiseControl, KafkaExporter).
However this would result in a lot of new Kubernetes Secrets and even though the Reconciler classes are separate it is one overall process, so it is acceptable to handle the state transitions at the end of each reconcile loop.

### Using new annotation for tracking certificates

A previous version of this proposal described a new annotation that used the fingerprint of the certificate, instead of the generation currently used.
This can only be used for tracking the rolling update to establish trust, not for rolling out end-entity certificates.

> This has been removed from this proposal in favour of keeping the existing method of using a generation, then we can always revisit this in a future proposal to support tools like Cert Manager.

Author: I've added some more description to the proposal about how the generation works.

## Motivation

In future it would be beneficial if Strimzi can integrate with commonly deployed certificate management solutions, such as [cert-manager][cmio], or [Vault][vault], rather than managing the Cluster CA itself.
These solutions work by providing an API that can be used to request certificates from a particular issuer.

Integrating with these solutions requires a change in how things are managed. Specifically:
 - Strimzi cannot guarantee that the issuer will issue every certificate signed by the same root CA certificate. 
   - For example cert-manager will if possible include the CA certificate to trust when it issues the certificate (if the CA certificate is not a public one), however this is per certificate and not always provided.
   - Using those solutions therefore requires TLS peers to be able to trust multiple root CA certificates.
 - These solutions cannot be responsible for rolling updates to components like Kafka.
   - This means that end-entity certificate generation and the rollout of trust in the CA certificates referenced in those end-entity certificates, needs to be decoupled.

>  - Certificates will likely be requested in an asynchronous manner, which means it can't be assumed that e.g. the CA certificate is already present when the component reconcilers run.

Author: Yes you interpreted correctly, I've expanded it to make the meaning clearer.

This would be highly valuable for organizations with compliance requirements with regard to certificates.

Currently, it is hard to integrate one of these certificate management solutions for a couple of reasons:
 - The state of certificates, particularly CA certificates is determined based on multiple different annotations and fields on internal Java objects.
   This makes it hard to comprehend the current state, particularly when doing a renewal and tricky to reason about edge cases that might occur.

>  - The component reconcilers directly access fields on the Cluster CA, for example when handling a CA certificate being removed.

Author: Yeah you're right, I've changed the language to hopefully make it clearer.

* It will be easier to reason about which CA certificates are in use/trusted, both as an end user when viewing the cluster, but also as a developer when reviewing the code.
  This is because currently the state is inferred by observing various Kubernetes annotations and Java class fields.

These benefits will also make it easier to evolve the management of CA certificates in future (see [Future changes](#future-changes)).

Non-goals of the proposal:
* This proposal does not change the management of Clients CA.
  Users can provide custom listener certificates, so allowing integration with a certificate management solution for the Clients CA doesn't bring as many benefits as it does for the Cluster CA.
* This proposal does not introduce integration with a certificate management solution.
  The aim of this proposal is to make it easier to allow this kind of integration in future, but assumes that the Cluster CA is still managed by Strimzi and (other than during renewal) there is a single Cluster CA certificate for the cluster.

### New trust-state Kubernetes Secret

> A new Kubernetes Secret is introduced which is updated by the cluster operator in its role as a CA to reflect whether the individual CA certificates are trusted and/or in use in the cluster.

Reviewer 2: "in its role as a CA", I don't think that's right, is it? It's more like "in its role as the receiver of issued certificates". Right now the CO does both the issuing and the handling of the issued certs, but the point of this proposal is that one day it will only perform the latter role, right?

data:
  ${fingerprint}.${state}: <PEM encoded CA certificate>
```

The `fingerprint` is the fingerprint/thumbprint of the certificate. I.e. the SHA-1 hash of the ASN.1 DER-encoded form of the X509 certificate, which is a commonly used way of identifying certificates using common tooling.
The `state` can be any of the states of the CA certificate trust state machine described below.
Including the state in the item name facilitates understanding the current role of the Kubernetes Secret within the cluster.

### CA certificate state machine

The "CA certificate trust state machine" has the following states:

```
  UNTRUSTED // not yet trusted everywhere it needs to be 
   |
   v
  TRUSTED_UNUSED // trusted everywhere it needs to be, but no EE certificates yet issued with this CA certificate
   |
   v
  TRUSTED_IN_USE // trusted everywhere, EE certificates issued using this CA certificate
   |
   v
  PHASE_OUT // trusted everywhere, but new end-entity certificates will not be issued using this CA certificate
   |
   v
  ZOMBIE // still trusted by some component, but with no issued end-entity certificates in current use.
```

### New trusted-certs Kubernetes Secret

> A new Kubernetes Secret is introduced which is updated by the cluster operator in its role as a CA to include the CA certificates that the components should currently trust.

Reviewer 2: Again, I think the wording "in its role as CA" is conflating two things which we really want to speak of as being distinct:

* A CA issues certificates. Currently the CO has code to do this.
* The CO is responsible for deploying/making use of the issued certificate.

<!-- This template is provided as an example with sections you may wish to comment on with respect to your proposal. Add or remove sections as required to best articulate the proposal. -->

# Decouple CA certificate management from end-entity certificate management

This proposal aims to decouple the management of the cluster CA certificate from the rolling out of trust of the CA certificate to components in a Strimzi cluster.

## Current situation

To provide a secure, TLS-enabled setup by default when deploying Kafka clusters, Strimzi integrated its own CA operations into the Cluster Operator.

> The Cluster Operator accomplishes this by using `openssl` to generate self-signed root CA certificates and private keys which it then uses to directly sign end-entity (EE) certificates (i.e. intermediate certificates are not used).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The Cluster Operator accomplishes this by using `openssl` to generate self-signed root CA certificates and private keys which it then uses to directly sign end-entity (EE) certificates (i.e. intermediate certificates can't be used).
```

Not sure we want to add this level of details to the proposal, but the way to enforce what you describe here is to generate a self-signed CA with pathlen=0, which is precisely what Strimzi does.

Example:

```sh
Certificate:
    Data:
        ...
        Issuer: O=io.strimzi, CN=cluster-ca v0
        ...
        Subject: O=io.strimzi, CN=cluster-ca v0
        ...
        X509v3 extensions:
            ...
            X509v3 Basic Constraints: critical
                CA:TRUE, pathlen:0
            X509v3 Key Usage: critical
                Certificate Sign, CRL Sign
```

The cluster CA issues certificates for the following Strimzi components:
* ZooKeeper nodes
* Kafka nodes
* User and Topic operators
* Cruise Control
* Kafka Exporter

The clients CA issues certificates for user applications using the User Operator, or through another external mechanism chosen by the user.

The cluster CA root certificate is added to the trust stores of Strimzi components.  This ensures that, for example, ZooKeeper nodes trust each other's certificates as well as the certificates of brokers, and brokers trust certificates issued to other brokers.

#### Fig 1: Cluster CA certificate and component relationships

![Cluster CA relationships](./images/073-cluster-ca.svg)

> Fig 1: In the diagram, the red lines show trust.
> For example, because the Kafka broker trusts the Cluster CA certificate,
> and the Cluster CA certificate signed the ZK EE certificate
> the broker will trust the ZK EE certificate presented by the ZK node
> during TLS handshake.

The cluster CA root certificate also needs to be trusted by Kafka clients connecting to the cluster so that clients trust the certificates presented by the brokers.

> The clients CA root certificate is added to the broker trust stores too, so that the brokers will trust certificates issued to Kafka client applications.

Reviewer: maybe adding "... and presented by clients to brokers when the mTLS is enabled"?

#### Fig 2: Clients CA certificate and component relationships

![Clients CA relationships](./images/073-clients-ca.svg)

### Existing Kubernetes Secrets

Strimzi currently uses the following Kubernetes Secrets to store the CA certificates and private keys:
* <CLUSTER_NAME>-cluster-ca-cert for the Cluster CA root certificate
* <CLUSTER_NAME>-cluster-ca for the Cluster CA private key
* <CLUSTER_NAME>-clients-ca-cert for the Clients CA root certificate
* <CLUSTER_NAME>-clients-ca for the Clients CA private key

Strimzi currently uses the following Kubernetes Secrets to store server certificates (signed by the cluster CA) that components will present to clients:
* <CLUSTER_NAME>-kafka-brokers for Kafka brokers
* <CLUSTER_NAME>-zookeeper-nodes for ZooKeeper nodes

Strimzi currently uses the following Kubernetes Secrets to store client certificates (signed by the cluster CA) that components will present to Kafka or ZooKeeper when making requests:
* <CLUSTER_NAME>-cluster-operator-certs for the Cluster Operator

> * <CLUSTER_NAME>-entity-topic-operator-certs for the Entity Topic Operator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* <CLUSTER_NAME>-entity-topic-operator-certs for the Topic Operator
```

> * <CLUSTER_NAME>-entity-user-operator-certs for the Entity User Operator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* <CLUSTER_NAME>-entity-user-operator-certs for the User Operator
```

Reviewer: I know that TO and UO are part of the EO but we usually refer to them just as TO and UO and not ETO and EUO.

* <CLUSTER_NAME>-kafka-exporter-certs for the Kafka Exporter
* <CLUSTER_NAME>-cruise-control-certs for Cruise Control

### Existing Kubernetes Secret and Pod Annotations

Strimzi uses both the notion of a "generation" and hashes when keeping track of certificates.

A generation is associated with a specific certificate or private key for either the Cluster or Clients CA.

> If Strimzi is managing the CA, it increments the generation each time the certificate or private key is renewed or replaced.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If Strimzi is managing the CA, it increments the generation each time the certificate is renewed or the private key is replaced (so the corresponding certificate is regenerated as well).
```

If the user is managing the CA, they are responsible for incrementing the generation.
The generations are then used during the reconcile loop to track the state of trust (as described in the example flows below).

Strimzi uses the following annotations on Kubernetes Secrets:
* strimzi.io/ca-cert-generation to indicate the generation of the Cluster CA or Client CA certificate in the Kubernetes Secret
* strimzi.io/ca-key-generation to indicate the generation of the Cluster CA or Client CA private key in the Kubernetes Secret

Strimzi uses the following annotations on Kubernetes Pods and Kubernetes Secrets to indicate the generation of the Cluster CA certificate used to sign the certificates that are either stored in the Kubernetes Secret, or presented by the Kubernetes Pod:
* strimzi.io/cluster-ca-cert-generation for certificates signed by the Cluster CA

> * strimzi.io/clients-ca-cert-generation for certificates signed by the Clients CA

Reviewer: In the previous both sections when you mention "Kubernetes Secrets" I would be more precise, specifying which ones you are referring to.

Strimzi uses the following annotation on Kubernetes Pods to indicate the generation of the Cluster CA private key used to sign the cluster CA certificate that the pod currently trusts:

> * strimzi.io/cluster-ca-key-generation

Reviewer: I would specificy "components" here, so something like "Kubernetes Pods components" even because technically it's not the pod itself trusting a certificate but the component/application running within it.

2. Create/update the StrimziPodSet used for the nodes in the cluster and add the following annotations:
   1. cluster-ca-cert-generation set to the current values passed in with the Cluster CA.
   2. cluster-ca-key-generation set to the current values passed in with the Cluster CA.
   3. server-cert-hash set to the full SHA1-hash of the certificate that was generated.

EntityOperatorReconciler, CruiseControlReconciler and KafkaExporterReconciler generate the certificates they will use to authenticate with Kafka and ZooKeeper and store them in the Kubernetes Secrets listed above, with the cluster-ca-cert-generation set to the current value passed in with the Cluster CA.

### Example flows

When a new cluster is first created the flow is:

1. Either the user or the CaReconciler creates the Cluster CA certificate and key and stores them in the <CLUSTER_NAME>-cluster-ca-cert and <CLUSTER_NAME>-cluster-ca Kubernetes Secrets respectively.
2. The CaReconciler generates the Cluster Operator certificate and stores it in the <CLUSTER_NAME>-cluster-operator-certs Kubernetes Secret.

> 3. The component reconcilers (KafkaReconciler, ZooKeeperReconciler, EntityOperatorReconciler etc) generate their certificates, store them in Kubernetes Secrets and annotate the Kubernetes Secrets and Pods with the cert and key generations, and (for ZooKeeper and Kafka) the certificate hash.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. The component reconcilers (KafkaReconciler, ZooKeeperReconciler, EntityOperatorReconciler etc) generate their corresponding EE certificates (signed by the newly generated cluster CA certificate), store them in Kubernetes Secrets and annotate the Kubernetes Secrets and Pods with the cert and key generations, and (for ZooKeeper and Kafka) the certificate hash.
```

> When the Cluster CA private key is updated (either because it has expired or the user has incremented the generation to indicate they've manually updated the Kubernetes Secret):

Reviewer: technically it's a certificate to expire (so the signed public key) but your CA private key can stay forever and you keep signing new CA certificates when they expire. The private key is usually re-generated if it's compromised, so I would be more precise here on what you mean.

> When the Cluster CA private key is updated (either because the user has requested for it to be regenerated (when Strimzi is managing the CA) or the user has incremented the generation to indicate they've manually updated the Kubernetes Secret):

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When the Cluster CA private key is updated (either because the user has requested for it to be regenerated while Strimzi is managing the CA or the user has incremented the generation to indicate they've manually updated the Kubernetes Secret):
```

1. If Strimzi is managing the Cluster CA, the CaReconciler renews the Cluster CAs certificate and key. The old certificate and key are kept in the respective Kubernetes Secret and renamed to ca-YYYY-MM-DDTHH-MM-SSZ.crt.
2. The CaReconciler skips updating the <CLUSTER_NAME>-cluster-operator-certs Kubernetes Secret (since the components still only trust the old CA certificate).
3. The CaReconciler rolls the ZooKeeper and Kafka nodes to trust the new CA certificates.
4. The ZooKeeper and Kafka reconcilers:

>    1. Generate new certificates signed by the new CA key.

Reviewer: Take into account that this is not the default behaviour in Strimzi.
We have the `clusterCA.certificateExpirationPolicy` field which defines if on certificate expiration, Strimzi should just renew the CA certificate (keeping the private key) using `renew-certificate` value or starting from a new private key using `replace-key` value. As I mentioned above regenerating a private key is not an operation which runs so often unless it's compromised, so we made the renewal (keeping the private key) as the default behaviour. More details here https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/main/api/src/main/java/io/strimzi/api/kafka/model/common/CertificateExpirationPolicy.java
Said that, we should be clear about this in the example flow you are describing.

   2. Update the cluster-ca-cert-generation, cluster-ca-key-generation and server-cert-hash annotations on the StrimziPodSets.
   3. During their rolling update step, roll the Kubernetes Pods for ZooKeeper and Kafka to use the new certificates (this is triggered by diffing the server-cert-hash annotation).
5. The EntityOperator, CruiseControl and KafkaExporter reconcilers generate new certificates signed by the new CA key and roll the Kubernetes Pods to use the new certificates.
6. A new reconciliation starts.

> 7. The CaReconciler updates the <CLUSTER_NAME>-cluster-operator-certs Kubernetes Secret with a new certificate signed by the new CA certificate (since the generations are now correct).

Reviewer 3: when it says `since the generations are now correct`, are we talking about generations on the Kafka and ZK StrimziPodSets?

8. The CaReconciler removes the old CA certificates and keys that have been named ca-YYYY-MM-DDTHH-MM-SSZ.crt.
9. The component reconcilers roll their Kubernetes Pods, since the Cluster CA passed in has a flag indicating certs have been removed.

The existing logic assumes a few things:
 - All certificates used by components have been signed by the same root CA certificate.

>  - The CaReconciler runs and (if required) has either created or updated the CA certificates and keys before the other reconcilers run, i.e. the CA certificate is already present when e.g. the KafkaReconciler starts.

Reviewer: Wdym by "The CaReconciler runs"? It always runs ... or?

Non-goals of the proposal:
* This proposal does not change the management of Clients CA.
  Users can provide custom listener certificates, so allowing integration with a certificate management solution for the Clients CA doesn't bring as many benefits as it does for the Cluster CA.
* This proposal does not introduce integration with a certificate management solution.
  The aim of this proposal is to make it easier to allow this kind of integration in future, but assumes that the Cluster CA is still managed by Strimzi and (other than during renewal) there is a single Cluster CA certificate for the cluster.

### New trust-state Kubernetes Secret

A new Kubernetes Secret is introduced which is updated by the cluster operator in its role of managing the cluster (specifically which issued certificates are stored where and rolling pods to use/trust those certificates) to reflect whether the individual CA certificates are trusted and/or in use in the cluster.

```yaml
kind: Secret
metdata:
  name: <CLUSTER_NAME>-cluster-ca-trust-state # e.g. foo-cluster-ca-trust-state
type: strimzi.io/trust
data:

>   ${fingerprint}.${state}: <PEM encoded CA certificate>

Reviewer 6: Do we still need to have the PEM encoded certificate here? Maybe ${fingerprint}: ${state} is enough now.

>   ${fingerprint}.${state}: <PEM encoded CA certificate>

Reviewer 7: From IBM's perspective, having the PEM encoded CA cert, we think the adoption of it is high amongst users that we work with so probably worth keeping.

Author: The PEM encoded CA cert will still be present in the `trusted-certs` secret, it just isn't needed in the `trust-state` secret.

   |
   v
  TRUSTED_IN_USE // trusted everywhere, EE certificates issued using this CA certificate
   |
   v
  PHASE_OUT // trusted everywhere, but new end-entity certificates will not be issued using this CA certificate
   |
   v
  ZOMBIE // still trusted by some component, but with no issued end-entity certificates in current use.
```

### New trusted-certs Kubernetes Secret

A new Kubernetes Secret is introduced which is updated by the cluster operator in its role as the receiver of issued certificates to include the CA certificates that the components should currently trust.
This Kubernetes Secret will be mounted into Kubernetes Pods to use a TrustStore.

```yaml
kind: Secret
metdata:
  name: <CLUSTER_NAME>-cluster-ca-trusted-certs # e.g. foo-cluster-ca-trusted-certs
type: strimzi.io/trust
data:
   ${fingerprint}.crt: <PEM encoded CA certificate>
```

The `fingerprint` is the fingerprint/thumbprint of the certificate. I.e. the SHA-1 hash of the ASN.1 DER-encoded form of the X509 certificate, which is a commonly used way of identifying certificates using common tooling.

### Example flows

When a new cluster is first created the flow is (new/altered steps in bold):

> 1. Either user or CaReconciler creates the Cluster CA certificate and key and stores them in Kubernetes Secrets.

Reviewer: I would be precise to which Kubernetes Secrets you are referring to, now that you have introduced new ones. I assume you are talking about the cluster CA secrets here (so the one we already have today).

2. __The CaReconciler takes the Cluster CA certificate and places it in the trust-state Kubernetes Secret with the state UNTRUSTED.__
3. The CaReconciler generates the Cluster Operator certificate and stores it in the <CLUSTER_NAME>-cluster-operator-certs Kubernetes Secret.
   It does this even though the state is UNTRUSTED, because the Kubernetes Secret was missing.
4. __The CaReconciler places the Cluster CA certificate in the trusted-certificates Kubernetes Secret.__
5. The ZooKeeper and Kafka reconcilers:

>    1. Generate their certificates and store them in Kubernetes Secrets. 

Reviewer: again be clearer which Secrets. Assuming they are the EE corresponding secrets.

   2. Create the StrimziPodSets for ZooKeeper/Kafka and add the cluster-ca-cert-generation and server-cert-hash annotations.
   3. During their rolling update step, roll the Kubernetes Pods for ZooKeeper/Kafka to use the new certificates (this is triggered by diffing the server-cert-hash annotation).
6. The EntityOperator, CruiseControl and KafkaExporter reconcilers generate their certificates and create their Kubernetes Deployments.
7. A new reconciliation starts.
8. __The CaReconciler sees that the cluster-ca-cert-generation on the ZooKeeper and Kafka Kubernetes Pods is current so updates the state of the Cluster CA in the trust-state Kubernetes Secret to TRUSTED_IN_USE.__

> When the Cluster CA private key is updated (either because it has expired or the user has incremented the generation to indicate they've manually updated the Kubernetes Secret):

Reviewer: See my previous comment about this sentence, when you were describing the current situation.

>    3. During their rolling update step, roll the Kubernetes Pods for ZooKeeper/Kafka to use the new certificates (this is triggered by diffing the server-cert-hash annotation).

Reviewer 3: if it is a new cluster and  StrimziPodSets just got created, doesn't that mean the new pods would get created with the new certificates, rather than being rolled by diffing the server-cert-hash on the pods since they don't exist yet?

Author: Good spot, this line shouldn't be here

2. Create/update the StrimziPodSet used for the nodes in the cluster and add the following annotations:
   1. cluster-ca-cert-generation set to the current values passed in with the Cluster CA.
   2. cluster-ca-key-generation set to the current values passed in with the Cluster CA.
   3. server-cert-hash set to the full SHA1-hash of the certificate that was generated.

EntityOperatorReconciler, CruiseControlReconciler and KafkaExporterReconciler generate the certificates they will use to authenticate with Kafka and ZooKeeper and store them in the Kubernetes Secrets listed above, with the cluster-ca-cert-generation set to the current value passed in with the Cluster CA.

### Example flows

When a new cluster is first created the flow is:

1. Either the user or the CaReconciler creates the Cluster CA certificate and key and stores them in the <CLUSTER_NAME>-cluster-ca-cert and <CLUSTER_NAME>-cluster-ca Kubernetes Secrets respectively.

> 2. The CaReconciler generates the Cluster Operator certificate and stores it in the <CLUSTER_NAME>-cluster-operator-certs Kubernetes Secret.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
2. The CaReconciler generates the Cluster Operator EE certificate (signed by the newly generated Cluster CA certificate) and stores it in the <CLUSTER_NAME>-cluster-operator-certs Kubernetes Secret.
```

3. The component reconcilers (KafkaReconciler, ZooKeeperReconciler, EntityOperatorReconciler etc) generate their corresponding EE certificates (signed by the newly generated Cluster CA certificate), store them in Kubernetes Secrets and annotate the Kubernetes Secrets and Pods with the cert and key generations, and (for ZooKeeper and Kafka) the certificate hash.

#### Fig 3: New cluster create flow

![New cluster create flow](./images/073-cert-new-existing.png)

> Fig 3: The numbers in the diagram match the numbers in the full description of the steps.
> The diagram omits the use of annotations.

> When the Cluster CA private key is updated (either because the user has requested for it to be regenerated (while Strimzi is managing the CA) or the user has incremented the generation to indicate they've manually updated the Kubernetes Secret):

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
When the Cluster CA private key is updated by the user, either by using the force-replace annotation, or the ca-cert-generation annotation:
```

1. If Strimzi is managing the Cluster CA, the CaReconciler regenerates the Cluster CAs certificate and key. The old certificate and key are kept in the respective Kubernetes Secret and renamed to ca-YYYY-MM-DDTHH-MM-SSZ.crt.
2. The CaReconciler skips updating the <CLUSTER_NAME>-cluster-operator-certs Kubernetes Secret (since the components still only trust the old CA certificate).

> 3. The CaReconciler rolls the ZooKeeper and Kafka nodes to trust the new CA certificates.

Reviewer 6: At this point, I think both the old and new CAs are trusted at the same time. Is this correct?

Author: Correct

4. The ZooKeeper and Kafka reconcilers:
   1. Generate new certificates signed by the new CA key.
   2. Update the cluster-ca-cert-generation, cluster-ca-key-generation and server-cert-hash annotations on the StrimziPodSets.
   3. During their rolling update step, roll the Kubernetes Pods for ZooKeeper and Kafka to use the new certificates (this is triggered by diffing the server-cert-hash annotation).
5. The EntityOperator, CruiseControl and KafkaExporter reconcilers generate new certificates signed by the new CA key and roll the Kubernetes Pods to use the new certificates.
6. A new reconciliation starts.
7. The CaReconciler updates the <CLUSTER_NAME>-cluster-operator-certs Kubernetes Secret with a new certificate signed by the new CA certificate (since the Kafka and ZooKeeper Kubernetes Pods now have the strimzi.io/cluster-ca-cert-generation and strimzi.io/cluster-ca-key-generation matching the current Cluster CA and therefore the Cluster CA is fully trusted and used).
8. The CaReconciler removes the old CA certificates and keys that have been named ca-YYYY-MM-DDTHH-MM-SSZ.crt.

> 9. The component reconcilers roll their Kubernetes Pods, since the Cluster CA passed in has a flag indicating certs have been removed.

Reviewer 6: What do you mean here? Which flag? Is this step needed to remove the old CA from their trust stores?

Author: Flag is properly not the best word to use, the Ca Java class has a field called `caCertsRemoved` and a method you can call to find out if in the current reconcile loop any CA certificates have been removed https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/main/operator-common/src/main/java/io/strimzi/operator/common/model/Ca.java#L772.

So what I am trying to say here is that the reconcilers get told through this internal mechanism that some certs have been removed.

Reviewer 6: I see, thanks for clarifying.

   |
   v
  ZOMBIE // still trusted by some component, but with no issued end-entity certificates in current use.
```

### New trusted-certs Kubernetes Secret

A new Kubernetes Secret is introduced which is updated by the cluster operator in its role as the receiver of issued certificates to include the CA certificates that the components should currently trust.
This Kubernetes Secret will be mounted into Kubernetes Pods to use a TrustStore.

```yaml
kind: Secret
metdata:
  name: <CLUSTER_NAME>-cluster-ca-trusted-certs # e.g. foo-cluster-ca-trusted-certs
data:
   ${fingerprint}.crt: <PEM encoded CA certificate>
```

The `fingerprint` is the fingerprint/thumbprint of the certificate. I.e. the SHA-1 hash of the ASN.1 DER-encoded form of the X509 certificate, which is a commonly used way of identifying certificates using common tooling.

### Example flows

When a new cluster is first created the flow is (new/altered steps in bold):

1. Either user or CaReconciler creates the Cluster CA certificate and key and stores them in the <CLUSTER_NAME>-cluster-ca and <CLUSTER_NAME>-cluster-ca-cert Kubernetes Secrets.

> 2. __The CaReconciler takes the Cluster CA certificate and places it in the trust-state Kubernetes Secret with the state UNTRUSTED (because this Cluster CA certificate is not already present in the trust-state).__

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
2. __The CaReconciler takes the Cluster CA certificate and places it in the trust-state Kubernetes Secret with the state UNTRUSTED, because this Cluster CA certificate is new and not yet present in any trust store.__
```

4. __The CaReconciler places the Cluster CA certificate in the trusted-certs Kubernetes Secret.__
5. The ZooKeeper and Kafka reconcilers:
   1. Generate their certificates and store them in the <CLUSTER_NAME>-kafka-brokers (for Kafka brokers) <CLUSTER_NAME>-zookeeper-nodes (for ZooKeeper nodes) Kubernetes Secrets. 
   2. Create the StrimziPodSets for ZooKeeper/Kafka and add the cluster-ca-cert-generation and server-cert-hash annotations.
6. The EntityOperator, CruiseControl and KafkaExporter reconcilers generate their certificates and create their Kubernetes Deployments.
7. A new reconciliation starts.
8. __The CaReconciler sees that the cluster-ca-cert-generation on the ZooKeeper and Kafka Kubernetes Pods is current so updates the state of the Cluster CA in the trust-state Kubernetes Secret to TRUSTED_IN_USE.__

#### Fig 5: New cluster create flow

![New cluster create flow](./images/073-cert-new-proposed.png)

> Fig 5: The numbers in the diagram match the numbers in the full description of the steps.
> The diagram omits the use of annotations and the EntityOperator, CruiseControl and KafkaExporter reconcilers.

> When the Cluster CA private key is updated (either because the user has requested for it to be regenerated (when Strimzi is managing the CA) or the user has incremented the generation to indicate they've manually updated the Kubernetes Secret):

Reviewer 6: Same suggestion as above.

> When the Cluster CA private key is updated (either because the user has requested for it to be regenerated (when Strimzi is managing the CA) or the user has incremented the generation to indicate they've manually updated the Kubernetes Secret):

Author: ```suggestion
When the Cluster CA private key is updated by the user, either by using the force-replace annotation, or the ca-cert-generation annotation:
```

1. If Strimzi is managing the Cluster CA, the CaReconciler renews the Cluster CA certificate and key. The old certificate and key can be removed from the Kubernetes Secret.

> 2. __The CaReconciler takes the Cluster CA certificate and places it in the trust-state Kubernetes Secret with the state UNTRUSTED. It also updates the old CA certificate to have the state PHASE_OUT.__

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
2. __The CaReconciler takes the new Cluster CA certificate and places it in the trust-state Kubernetes Secret with the state UNTRUSTED. It also updates the old CA certificate to have the state PHASE_OUT.__
```

7. A new reconciliation starts.
8. __The CaReconciler sees there is a CA certificate in the state TRUSTED_UNUSED in the trust-state Kubernetes Secret.
   It checks if the cluster-ca-cert-generation annotation on the Kafka and ZooKeeper Kubernetes Pods matches the current CA cert generation.
   If it does it updates the CA certificate state to TRUSTED_IN_USE, otherwise it rolls the Kafka and ZooKeeper Kubernetes Pods (jumping back to step 4 in this process).__
9. __Since the CA certificate state is TRUSTED_IN_USE the CaReconciler updates the <CLUSTER_NAME>-cluster-operator-certs Kubernetes Secret with a new certificate signed by the new CA certificate.__
10. __The CaReconciler removes the old Cluster CA certificate from the trusted-certs Kubernetes Secret and changes the state of it in the trust-state Kubernetes Secret to ZOMBIE.__
11. __The CaReconciler rolls the Kafka and ZooKeeper nodes so they no longer trust the old Cluster CA.__
12. __The CaReconciler removes the old Cluster CA certificate from the trust-state Kubernetes Secret.__

> 13. The other component reconcilers (i.e. not Kafka or ZooKeeper) roll their Kubernetes Pods, since the Cluster CA passed in has a flag indicating certs have been removed.

Reviewer 6: Same question as above.

> Fig 6: The numbers in the diagram match the numbers in the full description of the steps.
> The diagram omits the use of annotations and the EntityOperator, CruiseControl and KafkaExporter reconcilers, and the removal of trust of the old CA certificate and key.

Notes:
* The existing annotations strimzi.io/ca-cert-generation and strimzi.io/server-cert-hash are still used to keep track of the certificate being presented by the Kubernetes Pod and which generation of the Cluster CA signed that certificate.
* The strimzi.io/ca-key-generation is no longer needed, because it is being tracked in the trust-state Kubernetes Secret.

### Future changes

This proposal does not cover all changes needed to integrate with certificate management solutions.
Instead it aims to make an improvement to the existing logic and act as a first step towards integrating some certificate management solution.
The approach suggested aligns with the approach taken in the [closed proposal on CA abstraction][pr46].

Other/Future proposals will be needed to cover:
 - Refactoring the end-entity certificate issuance process, so that components request a certificate and asynchronously are issued a certificate.

>  - Refactoring the tracking of which certificates are signed by which CA certificates.

Reviewer 6: Are you thinking about using the trust-state secret for that?

Author: Possibly, but I think it depends how we end up handling the asynchronous issuing of certificates. So until we implement this proposal and then look at how that can fit in I think it's unclear.

<!-- This template is provided as an example with sections you may wish to comment on with respect to your proposal. Add or remove sections as required to best articulate the proposal. -->

# Decouple CA certificate management from end-entity certificate management

This proposal aims to decouple the management of the cluster CA certificate from the rolling out of trust of the CA certificate to components in a Strimzi cluster.

## Current situation

To provide a secure, TLS-enabled setup by default when deploying Kafka clusters, Strimzi integrated its own CA operations into the Cluster Operator.
The Cluster Operator accomplishes this by using `openssl` to generate self-signed root CA certificates and private keys which it then uses to directly sign end-entity (EE) certificates.
This CA certificate has zero pathlen, which means it cannot sign any intermediate CA.
A _cluster CA_  and _clients CA_ are generated.
These CAs are only used for Kafka clusters and a unique instance of each CA is used for each Kafka cluster.
The cluster CA issues certificates for the following Strimzi components:
* ZooKeeper nodes
* Kafka nodes

> * User and Topic operators

Reviewer 3: Nit: should cluster operator be included in this list as well?

The `state` can be any of the states of the CA certificate trust state machine described below.

### CA certificate state machine

The "CA certificate trust state machine" has the following states:

```
  UNTRUSTED // not yet trusted everywhere it needs to be 
   |
   v
  TRUSTED_UNUSED // trusted everywhere it needs to be, but no EE certificates yet issued with this CA certificate
   |
   v
  TRUSTED_IN_USE // trusted everywhere, EE certificates issued using this CA certificate
   |
   v
  PHASE_OUT // trusted everywhere, but new end-entity certificates will not be issued using this CA certificate
   |
   v
  ZOMBIE // still trusted by some component, but with no issued end-entity certificates in current use.
```

### New trusted-certs Kubernetes Secret

A new Kubernetes Secret is introduced which is updated by the cluster operator in its role as the receiver of issued certificates to include the CA certificates that the components should currently trust.
This Kubernetes Secret will be mounted into Kubernetes Pods to use a TrustStore.

```yaml
kind: Secret
metdata:
  name: <CLUSTER_NAME>-cluster-ca-trusted-certs # e.g. foo-cluster-ca-trusted-certs

> type: strimzi.io/trust

Author: This type field was copied from the original proposal to differentiate between the different Secrets that were used for tracking state of the end-entity certificates and root certificates, however I wonder if given this is only a partial implementation of that proposal we should remove it. @tombentley what do you think? We can always introduce this at a later date if needed.

Reviewer 2: I'm happy if we remove this.

data:
   ${fingerprint}.crt: <PEM encoded CA certificate>
```

The `fingerprint` is the fingerprint/thumbprint of the certificate. I.e. the SHA-1 hash of the ASN.1 DER-encoded form of the X509 certificate, which is a commonly used way of identifying certificates using common tooling.

### Example flows

When a new cluster is first created the flow is (new/altered steps in bold):

1. Either user or CaReconciler creates the Cluster CA certificate and key and stores them in the <CLUSTER_NAME>-cluster-ca and <CLUSTER_NAME>-cluster-ca-cert Kubernetes Secrets.

> 2. __The CaReconciler takes the Cluster CA certificate and places it in the trust-state Kubernetes Secret with the state UNTRUSTED.__

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. __The CaReconciler takes the Cluster CA certificate and places it in the trust-state Kubernetes Secret with the state UNTRUSTED (because this Cluster CA certificate is not already present in the trust-state).__
```

> 3. The CaReconciler generates the Cluster Operator certificate and stores it in the <CLUSTER_NAME>-cluster-operator-certs Kubernetes Secret.

Reviewer 2: If there are multiple CA certs in the trust-state how does it decide which one to use for issuing new EE certs like this one? In particular during cluster bootstrapping like this it's OK to use one that's `UNTRUSTED`, but once a cluster is running we use one that's `TRUSTED_UNUSED`. And I guess if we needed a new cert for a newly added broker we'd select one that was `TRUSTED`?

Does the CaReconciler 'know' which CA cert to use because of in-memory state (i.e. state that's been built in-memory by the prior steps in this reconciliation)? In which case we need to consider the edge cases that come about if the CO is restarted part way through and that in-memory state is lost. 

Or does it decide based purely on the persistent state (Secrets)? In which case it needs to be able to figure out the signing cert and key based purely on the Secrets. I think that needs to be explained in more detail. For example, does anything guarantee that there is only ever a single cert that's `TRUSTED`? If not, which will be used?

Author: The Strimzi CA uses the certificate and key stored in the <CLUSTER_NAME>-cluster-ca and <CLUSTER_NAME>-cluster-ca-cert Kubernetes Secrets when issuing new EE certs. So it doesn't rely on either the in-memory state or the persistent state. The persistent state is used to make sure that no new EE certs are issued until all components trust the most recently added CA cert (apart from as you say during the cluster bootstrapping). In practice I think there should only be a single cert `TRUSTED_IN_USE`, but I don't think we need that guarantee for the flow to work.

8. __The CaReconciler sees there is a CA certificate in the state TRUSTED_UNUSED in the trust-state Kubernetes Secret.
   It checks if the cluster-ca-cert-generation annotation on the Kafka and ZooKeeper Kubernetes Pods matches the current CA cert generation.
   If it does it updates the CA certificate state to TRUSTED_IN_USE, otherwise it rolls the Kafka and ZooKeeper Kubernetes Pods (jumping back to step 4 in this process).__
9. __Since the CA certificate state is TRUSTED_IN_USE the CaReconciler updates the <CLUSTER_NAME>-cluster-operator-certs Kubernetes Secret with a new certificate signed by the new CA certificate.__
10. __The CaReconciler removes the old Cluster CA certificate from the trusted-certs Kubernetes Secret and changes the state of it in the trust-state Kubernetes Secret to ZOMBIE.__
11. __The CaReconciler rolls the Kafka and ZooKeeper nodes so they no longer trust the old Cluster CA.__
12. __The CaReconciler removes the old Cluster CA certificate from the trust-state Kubernetes Secret.__
13. The other component reconcilers (i.e. not Kafka or ZooKeeper) roll their Kubernetes Pods, since the Cluster CA passed in has a flag indicating certs have been removed.

> #### Fig 6: New cluster create flow

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Fig 6: New CA certificate flow
```
